Add Gateway API v1.3 Blog Post (#50999)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2025-05-28-gateway-api-v1.3/index.md

---
layout: blog
title: "Gateway API v1.3.0: Advancements in Request Mirroring, CORS, Gateway Merging, and Retry Budgets"
date: 2025-05-28T09:00:00-08:00
slug: gateway-api-v1-3
author: >
  [Candace Holman](https://github.com/candita) (Red Hat)
---

> {{< figure src="gateway-api-logo.svg" alt="Gateway API logo" >}}

Reviewer: This isn't a diagram, so using a plain
```suggestion
![Gateway API logo](gateway-api-logo.svg)
```
should be fine

Author: Ok.  cc @dipesh-rawat

Join us in the Kubernetes SIG Network community in celebrating the general
availability of [Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/) v1.3.0! This
version of the API was released on April 24, 2025, and there are already a number

> of conformant implementations to try out.

Reviewer: Can we tweak the wording so that people are clear that this is a retrospective announcement?

Maybe in the future we can get the announcements ready before the release, but for this one we need to make it a little more clear that the April date isn't an error (at first I thought it was).

Author: Okay, done.

Gateway API v1.3.0 brings a new feature to the _Standard channel_
(Gateway API's GA release channel): percentage-based request mirroring, and
introduces three new experimental features: cross-origin resource sharing (CORS)
filters, a standard mechanism for listener and gateway merging, and retry budgets.

## Graduation to Standard Channel:

Graduation to Standard Channel is a notable achievement for Gateway API
features, as inclusion in the Standard release channel denotes a high level of

> confidence in the API surface and provides guarantees of backward compatibility.

Author: I wouldn't go that far without convening the team.  Hope it's okay as is.

Of course, as with any other Kubernetes API, Standard Channel features can continue

> to evolve with backward-compatible additions over time, and we certainly expect

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to evolve with backward-compatible additions over time, and we (SIG Network)
certainly expect
```

further refinements and improvements in the future. For more information on how
all of this works, refer to the [Gateway API Versioning Policy](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/versioning/).

> ### Percentage-Based Request Mirroring :tada:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Percentage-based request mirroring
```

Leads: [Lior Lieberman](https://github.com/LiorLieberman),[Jake Bennert](https://github.com/jakebennert)

GEP-3171: [Percentage-Based Request Mirroring](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/blob/main/geps/gep-3171/index.md)

> Percentage-Based Request Mirroring is an enhancement to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Percentage-based request mirroring_ is an enhancement to the
```

> [HTTP Request Mirroring](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/http-request-mirroring/)
> feature, which allows HTTP requests to be duplicated to another backend using the

Reviewer: I would write:
```suggestion
existing support for [HTTP request mirroring](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/http-request-mirroring/), which allows HTTP requests to be duplicated to another backend using the
```

`RequestMirror` filter type.  Request mirroring is particularly useful in
blue-green deployment. It can be used to assess the impact of request scaling on
application performance without impacting responses to clients.

The previous mirroring capability worked on all the requests to a `backendRef`.  

> Percentage-Based Request Mirroring allows users to specify a percentage of requests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Percentage-based request mirroring allows users to specify a fraction of requests
```
I would use the word fraction so that the later mention that you can do this is less of a surprise.

they want to be mirrored. This can be particularly useful when Services are
receiving a large volume of requests. Instead of mirroring all of those requests,
this new feature can be used to mirror a smaller subset of them.

Here's an example with 42% of the requests to `foo-v1` being mirrored to `foo-v2`:

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: http-filter-mirror
  labels:
    gateway: mirror-gateway
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: mirror-gateway
  hostnames:
  - mirror.example
  rules:
  - backendRefs:
    - name: foo-v1
      port: 8080
    filters:
    - type: RequestMirror
      requestMirror:
        backendRef:
          name: foo-v2
          port: 8080
        percent: 42 # This value must be an integer.
```

> The percentage can also be expressed using a fraction.  This shows an example

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
You can also configure the partial mirroring using a fraction. Here is an example
```

with 5 out of every 1000 requests to `foo-v1` being mirrored to `foo-v2`.

```yaml
  rules:
  - backendRefs:
    - name: foo-v1
      port: 8080
    filters:
    - type: RequestMirror
      requestMirror:
        backendRef:
          name: foo-v2
          port: 8080
        fraction:
          numerator: 5
          denominator: 1000
```

> ## Additions to Experimental Channel:
> #### Experimental Channel Additions and Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Additions to Experimental channel
```
We use structured headings. I've dropped the level 4 heading; it didn't seem useful to keep it.

> The experimental channel is Gateway API's channel for experimenting with new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Experimental channel is Gateway API's channel for experimenting with new
```

features and gaining confidence with them before allowing them to graduate to
standard.  Please note: the experimental channel may include features that are
changed or removed later.

> Starting in release v1.3.0, in an effort to distinguish experimental channel
> resources from standard channel resources, new experimental resources have the

Reviewer: Does this make sense?
```suggestion
Starting in release v1.3.0, in an effort to distinguish Experimental channel
resources from Standard channel resources, any new experimental API kinds have the
```

prefix "**X**".  For the same reason, experimental resources are now added to the

> object group `gateway.networking.x-k8s.io` instead of `gateway.networking.k8s.io`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
API group `gateway.networking.x-k8s.io` instead of `gateway.networking.k8s.io`. 
```

Bear in mind that using new experimental channel resources means they can coexist
with standard channel resources, but migrating these resources to the standard
channel will require recreating them with the standard channel names and API

> Group (both of which lack the "x" prefix).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
group (both of which lack the "X" prefix).
```

Author: Addressed in a different way.

> 

Reviewer: If there is any code to automate the migration, it'd be great to mention it.

> This release introduces two new experimental resources: `XBackendTrafficPolicy`
> and `XListenerSet`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The v1.3 release introduces two new experimental API kinds: XBackendTrafficPolicy
and XListenerSet.
```

Per our [style guide](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/), we don't use backticks for API kinds.

> ### CORS Filter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### CORS filtering
```

Leads: [Liang Li](https://github.com/liangli), [Eyal Pazz](https://github.com/EyalPazz), [Rob Scott](https://github.com/robscott)

GEP-1767: [CORS Filter](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/blob/main/geps/gep-1767/index.md)

Cross-origin resource sharing (CORS) is an HTTP-header based mechanism that allows
a web page to access restricted resources from a server on an origin (domain,
scheme, or port) different from the domain that served the web page. This feature

> adds a new `HTTPRouteFilter` called `HTTPCORSFilter` to configure the handling of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
adds a new HTTPRoute `filter` type, called `CORS`, to configure the handling of
```

cross-origin requests before the response is sent back to the client.

Here's an example of a simple cross-origin configuration:
```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: http-route-cors
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: http-gateway
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /resource/foo
    filters:
    - cors:
      - allowOrigins:
        - *
        allowMethods: 
        - GET
        - HEAD
        - POST
        allowHeaders: 
        - Accept
        - Accept-Language
        - Content-Language
        - Content-Type
        - Range

>       type: CORS

Reviewer: I'd make this the first item in the map, for clarity.

    backendRefs:
    - kind: Service
      name: http-route-cors
      port: 80
```

> In this case, the `Gateway` returns an origin header of "*", which means that the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, the Gateway returns an _origin header_ of "*", which means that the
```

> requested resource can be accessed from any `Origin`, a methods header consisting
> of `GET`, `HEAD`, and `POST`, and a headers header of `Accept`, `Accept-Language`,
> `Content-Language`, `Content-Type`, and `Range`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
requested resource can be referenced from any origin, a methods header
(`Access-Control-Allow-Methods`) that permits the `GET`, `HEAD`, and `POST` verbs,
and a headers header allowing `Accept`, `Accept-Language`, `Content-Language`, `Content-Type`, and `Range`.
```

```text
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Access-Control-Allow-Origin: *
Access-Control-Allow-Methods: GET, HEAD, POST
Access-Control-Allow-Headers: Accept,Accept-Language,Content-Language,Content-Type,Range
```     
The complete list of fields in the new CORS filter:

> * AllowOrigins
> * AllowMethods
> * AllowHeaders
> * AllowCredentials
> * ExposeHeaders
> * MaxAge

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `allowOrigins`
* `allowMethods`
* `allowHeaders`
* `allowCredentials`
* `exposeHeaders`
* `maxAge`
```

We write field names in the case they use in the API.

See [CORS protocol](https://fetch.spec.whatwg.org/#http-cors-protocol) for details.

> ### XListenerSets (Standard Mechanism for Listener  and Gateway Merging)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### XListenerSets (mechanism for Listener and Gateway merging) {#XListenerSet}
```

It's not standardized yet! Maybe it will be soon.

Lead: [Dave Protasowski](https://github.com/dprotaso)

GEP-1713: [ListenerSets - Standard Mechanism to Merge Multiple Gateways](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3213)

> This feature adds a new experimental resource called `XListenerSet` to allow a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This release adds a new experimental API kind, XListenerSet, that allows a
```

> shared list of Listeners to be attached to one or more parent Gateway(s).  In

Reviewer: ```suggestion
shared list of _listeners_ to be attached to one or more parent Gateway(s).  In
```

> addition, it expands upon the current suggestion that implementations may merge

Reviewer: ```suggestion
addition, it expands upon the existing suggestion that Gateway APU implementations may merge
```

> `Gateway` resources.  It also:

Reviewer: Is this a better way to put it:
```suggestion
configuration from multiple Gateway objects.  It also:
```

> - Adds a new field `allowedListeners` to `gateway.spec`. AllowedListeners defines

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(provided you enable the experimental channel)

- adds a new field `allowedListeners` to `gateway.spec`. The `allowedListeners` field defines
```

> - Adds a new field `allowedListeners` to `gateway.spec`. AllowedListeners defines
> from which namespaces to select XListenerSets that are allowed to attach to that
> `Gateway` (Same, All, None, or Selector based).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Adds a new field `allowedListeners` to the `.spec` of a Gateway. 
  `allowedListeners` defines
from which Namespaces to select XListenerSets that are allowed to attach
  to that
Gateway: Same, All, None, or Selector based.
```

> - Increases the previous maximum number (64) of Listeners with the addition of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Increases the previous maximum number (64) of listeners with the addition of
```

XListenerSets.

> - Allows the delegation of Listener configuration like TLS to applications in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Allows the delegation of listener configuration, such as TLS, to applications in
```

other namespaces.

> The following example shows a `Gateway` with an HTTP listener and two child HTTPS
> XListenerSets with unique hostnames and certificates.  The combined set of Listeners
> attached to the `Gateway` includes the two additional HTTPS Listeners in the
> XListenerSets that attach to the `Gateway`.  This example illustrates the
> delegation of Listener TLS config to application owners in different namespaces
> ("store" and "app").  The `HTTPRoute` has both the `Gateway` Listener `foo` and
> one `XListenerSet` Listener `second` as `parentRefs`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows a Gateway with an HTTP listener and two child HTTPS
XListenerSets with unique hostnames and certificates.  The combined set of listeners
attached to the Gateway includes the two additional HTTPS listeners in the
XListenerSets that attach to the Gateway.  This example illustrates the
delegation of listener TLS config to application owners in different namespaces
("store" and "app").  The HTTPRoute has both the Gateway listener named "foo" and
one XListenerSet listener named "second" as `parentRefs`.
```

  name: prod-external
  namespace: infra
spec:
  gatewayClassName: example
  allowedListeners:
  - from: All
  listeners:
  - name: foo
    hostname: foo.com
    protocol: HTTP
    port: 80
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: XListenerSet
metadata:
  name: store
  namespace: store
spec:
  parentRef:
    name: prod-external
  listeners:
  - name: first
    hostname: first.foo.com
    protocol: HTTPS
    port: 443
    tls:
      mode: Terminate
      certificateRefs:
      - kind: Secret
        group: ""
        name: first-workload-cert
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: XListenerSet
metadata:
  name: app
  namespace: app
spec:
  parentRef:
    name: prod-external
  listeners:
  - name: second
    hostname: second.foo.com
    protocol: HTTPS
    port: 443
    tls:
      mode: Terminate
      certificateRefs:
      - kind: Secret
        group: ""
        name: second-workload-cert
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: httproute-example
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: app
    kind: XListenerSet
    sectionName: second
  - name: parent-gateway
    kind: Gateway
    sectionName: foo
    ...
```

> Each Listener in a `Gateway` must have a unique combination of Port, Protocol,
> (and Hostname if supported by the protocol) in order for all Listeners to be
> *compatible* and not conflicted over which traffic they should receive.  
> Furthermore, implementations can *merge* separate Gateways into a single set of
> Listener addresses if all Listeners across all Gateways are compatible.  The
> management of merged Listeners is under-specified in releases prior to v1.3.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each `listener` in a Gateway must have a unique combination of `port`, `protocol`,
(and `hostname` if supported by the protocol) in order for all listeners to be
**compatible** and not conflicted over which traffic they should receive.

Furthermore, implementations can _merge_ separate Gateways into a single set of
listener addresses if all listeners across those Gateways are compatible.  The
management of merged listeners was under-specified in releases prior to v1.3.0.
```

> With this feature, the specification on merging is expanded.  Implementations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the new feature, the specification on merging is expanded.  Implementations
```

must treat the parent Gateways as having the merged list of all listeners from
itself and from attached XListenerSets, and validation of this list of listeners

> must behave the same as if the list were part of a single `Gateway`. Within a single

Reviewer: ```suggestion
must behave the same as if the list were part of a single Gateway. Within a single
```

> Gateway, Listeners will then be ordered using the following precedence:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gateway, listeners are ordered using the following precedence:
```

> 1. Single Listeners (not a part of an `XListenerSet`) first, followed by
> 2. Listeners ordered by creation time (oldest first), followed by
> 3. Listeners ordered alphabetically by “namespace/name”

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Single listeners (not a part of an XListenerSet) first,
1. remaining listeners ordered by:
   - object creation time (oldest first), and if two listeners have the same timestamp
   - alphabetically based on "{namespace}/{name of listener}"
```

What happens if there are multiple listeners in the same namespace with the same creation time and the same name? Is that a bug, an error, or can we explain how the ordering works?
It's also OK to link to the Gateway API docs for the nitty gritty details.

Author: @dprotaso @robscott any feedback on this?

Author: @lmktfy I'm going to adopt your rewording, but I don't have an answer to your question.

> 

Reviewer: I assume that this is true:
```suggestion

You need to enable the experimental channel for Gateway API to use this alpha API in your cluster.

```

> ### XBackendTrafficPolicy (Retry Budgets)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Retry budgets (XBackendTrafficPolicy) {#XBackendTrafficPolicy}
```

> Leads: [Eric Bishop](https://github.com/ericbishop), [Mike Morris](https://github.com/mikemorris)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Leads: [Eric Bishop](https://github.com/ericdbishop), [Mike Morris](https://github.com/mikemorris)
```

GEP-3388: [Retry Budgets](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-3388)

> This feature specifies the configuration of a "retry budget" across all endpoints

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature allows you to configure a a _retry budget_ across all endpoints
```

> of a destination service.  This is used to limit additional client-side retries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of a destination Service.  This is used to limit additional client-side retries
```

> after reaching a configured threshold. The budget can be configured using a
> maximum percentage of active requests, or an interval during which requests will
> be considered. The development of this specification changed the existing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
after reaching a configured threshold. When configuring the budget, the maximum 
percentage of active requests that may consist of retries may be specified, as well as 
the interval over which requests will be considered when calculating the threshold 
for retries. The development of this specification changed the existing
```

> experimental field `BackendLBPolicy` into `XBackendTrafficPolicy` in the interest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
experimental field `backendLBPolicy` into a new API kind, XBackendTrafficPolicy,
in the interest
```

Author: Addressed slightly differently.

of reducing the proliferation of policy resources that had commonalities.

> The following example shows an `XBackendTrafficPolicy` that applies a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows an XBackendTrafficPolicy that applies a
```

> The following example shows an `XBackendTrafficPolicy` that applies a
> `retryConstraint` that represents a budget that limits the retries to a maximum
> of 20% of requests, over a duration of 10 seconds, and to a minimum of 3 retries
> over 1 second.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example shows an `XBackendTrafficPolicy` that applies a
`retryConstraint` that represents a budget that dynamically limits the retries to a maximum
of 20% of the total requests over a 10 second interval, with a minimum retry rate of 3 retries
over 1 second.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: XBackendTrafficPolicy
metadata:
  name: traffic-policy-example
spec:
  retryConstraint:
    budget: 
        percent: 20
        interval: 10s
    minRetryRate:
      count: 3
      interval: 1s
    ...
```

> 

Reviewer: I assume that this is true:
```suggestion

You need to enable the experimental channel for Gateway API to use this alpha API in your cluster.

```

Author: Addressed this in a different way.

## Try it out

Unlike other Kubernetes APIs, you don't need to upgrade to the latest version of
Kubernetes to get the latest version of Gateway API. As long as you're running
Kubernetes 1.26 or later, you'll be able to get up and running with this version
of Gateway API.

> To try out the API, follow our [Getting Started Guide](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/).

Reviewer: We avoid "we" and "our" unless it means that the blog has multiple authors and they are the "we" in question.

```suggestion
To try out the API, follow the [Getting Started Guide](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/).
```
("our" could read as "Red Hat's", given your affiliation)

v1.3 experimental channel features. In alphabetical order:

- [Airlock Microgateway 4.6](https://github.com/airlock/microgateway/releases/tag/4.6.0)
- [Cilium main](https://github.com/cilium/cilium)
- [Envoy Gateway v1.4.0](https://github.com/envoyproxy/gateway/releases/tag/v1.4.0)
- [Istio 1.27-dev](https://istio.io)

## Get involved

Wondering when a feature will be added?  There are lots of opportunities to get
involved and help define the future of Kubernetes routing APIs for both ingress
and service mesh.

* Check out the [user guides](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides) to see what
use-cases can be addressed.
* Try out one of the [existing Gateway controllers](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/implementations/).
* Or [join us in the community](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/contributing/)
and help us build the future of Gateway API together!

The maintainers would like to thank _everyone_ who's contributed to Gateway
API, whether in the form of commits to the repo, discussion, ideas, or general
support. We could never have made this kind of progress without the support of
this dedicated and active community.

## Related Kubernetes blog articles

> * [Gateway API v1.2: WebSockets, Timeouts, Retries, and More](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2024/11/21/gateway-api-v1-2/)
>   11/2024
> * [Gateway API v1.1: Service mesh, GRPCRoute, and a whole lot more](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2024/05/09/gateway-api-v1-1/)
>   05/2024
> * [New Experimental Features in Gateway API v1.0](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2023/11/28/gateway-api-ga/)
>   11/2023
> * [Gateway API v1.0: GA Release](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2023/10/31/gateway-api-ga/)
>   10/2023

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Gateway API v1.2: WebSockets, Timeouts, Retries, and More](/blog/2024/11/21/gateway-api-v1-2/)
  11/2024
* [Gateway API v1.1: Service mesh, GRPCRoute, and a whole lot more](/blog/2024/05/09/gateway-api-v1-1/)
  05/2024
* [New Experimental Features in Gateway API v1.0](/blog/2023/11/28/gateway-api-ga/)
  11/2023
* [Gateway API v1.0: GA Release](/blog/2023/10/31/gateway-api-ga/)
  10/2023
```
